
***BEGINNING DOCUMENT***
States can legalize MDMA for pharmaceutical use even if the federal government does not
States have many options when considering the legalization or decriminalization of psychedelic medicines within their borders.
 
Gregory Ferenstein
June 12, 2024
 
 
 
The emerging psychedelic pharmaceutical industry was dealt a shock on June 4 after a U.S. Food and Drug Administration advisory panel recommended the rejection of Lykos Therapeutics’ application to have MDMA (methylenedioxymethamphetamine) approved as a prescription medicine to treat post-traumatic stress disorder.

As the first psychedelic medicine to receive the FDA’s “breakthrough status” designation, a designation that may accelerate the adoption of promising treatments, MDMA has the potential to pave the way for a new and powerful niche in mental health pharmaceuticals.

While the federal government might have hit a roadblock in legalizing MDMA for pharmaceutical use, state governments can still move forward in legalizing access to the psychedelic.

Politically, it has been easier for state lawmakers to defer to the FDA to approve new medications. However, it is unclear whether any psychedelic pharmaceutical company can overcome the research methods standards at the FDA and successfully introduce a new drug.

In the case of MDMA, the FDA recognized its unique potential by granting the substance a “breakthrough therapy” designation, and clinical trials generally confirmed the safety and effectiveness of the drug in treating post-traumatic stress disorder. However, progress has been halted by the FDA advisory panel’s reluctance to recommend approval of a psychedelic medicine.

One reason why FDA advisors might be reluctant to move forward on MDMA is due to concerns about the techniques used in the clinical trials. One concern is that a high number of participants can identify when they are in the placebo group, defeating the long-held gold standard of a control group that is “blind” to whether they received the drug. Researchers have attempted different mathematical techniques and survey questions to address issues around blinding and other concerns. When these approaches are applied to clinical trial data, the statistical differences between the placebo and treatment groups become harder to distinguish.

But, even with advancements in research techniques, it might take some time for FDA regulators to fully come around to the idea of MDMA for pharmaceutical use, which makes the federal drug approval pathway difficult and uncertain. However, just as with legalizing cannabis, states can create pathways of their own to enable access to pharmaceutical MDMA.

Oregon and Colorado have already legalized the use of another promising psychedelic, psilocybin, in professional treatments. As the active ingredient in “magic mushrooms,” psilocybin is still federally illegal, and there are ongoing clinical trials of synthetic versions. While legalizing plants, such as cannabis and psychedelic mushrooms, is easier for states because consumers can grow them, it is also possible to legalize the manufacturing of synthetic chemicals, such as MDMA.

For instance, California State Sen. Scott Wiener (D-San Francisco) had originally proposed legalizing MDMA in Senate Bill 1012. The MDMA inclusion was later stripped out of the bill, which ultimately failed to pass. Had it passed with the MDMA component, the bill would have required a state agency to disseminate specific manufacturing practices.

While these are a few examples, states have many options when considering the legalization or decriminalization of psychedelic medicines within their borders. They could choose to allow a company with basic safety and efficacy evidence, such as Lykos’s MDMA compound, exclusive rights to manufacture in the state. Legislators could propose pilot programs similar to those in Japan, where consumers may purchase access to participate in early drug trials that have already passed basic safety standards. Or, states may allow direct sales from multiple manufacturers, as many now do with cannabis products.

To be sure, this is new territory. States have not had to develop comprehensive protocols for therapy paired with synthetic pharmaceuticals. However, Oregon has established a clinical protocol for psilocybin-assisted therapy using products manufactured under exacting state standards. The main difference between this approach and a synthetic medicine like MDMA is that the active compound is derived through a chemical reaction rather than a plant extract.

Regardless, in the wake of the FDA advisory panel’s reaction to MDMA, it now seems clear that the locus of action for psychedelic therapies will be at the state level, just as it has been for medical marijuana.



***BEGINNING DOCUMENT***

Commentary
State psychedelics legalization and policy roundup — May 2024
Legislative progress slows, a Massachusetts ballot initiative moves forward, and Colorado rejects censorship.
 
Gregory Ferenstein
May 30, 2024
 
 
 
This post is part of an ongoing series summarizing state-based psychedelic reforms intended for policy professional professionals. 

There was a normal winnowing of many exciting legislative proposals in the first quarter of 2024 as momentum flattened and the restrictive status quo won the day. Psychedelic activists, however, continue to make progress throughout the country, despite pushback.

In California, state Sen. Scott Weiner’s (D-San Francisco) Senate Bill 1012 has failed to secure support from the Senate Finance Committee. The bill would have created a market of regulated, in-person psychedelic therapy with state-certified professionals, similar to what is already implemented in Oregon. His proposal was introduced as a response to Gov. Gavin Newsom’s previous veto of a bill last year to decriminalize some botanical psychedelics.

Weiner’s fellow legislators had reportedly demanded more restrictions to limit access to in-person, professionally guided experiences to require providers of psychedelic-assisted therapy to hold a valid California medical or therapy license.

We argue in an op-ed that these restrictions would substantially increase costs and compromise public safety by driving consumer demand into the illicit market.

In Maryland, state Sen. Brian Feldman’s (D-District 15) Senate Bill 1009 to create a working group to study psychedelic therapy progressed quickly through both legislative chambers. It was signed into law on May 16.

In Wisconsin, lawmakers introduced House Bill 753 to create a pilot program for medicinal psilocybin. In April, it failed.

In Illinois, state Sen. Rachel Ventura (D-District 43) introduced Senate Bill 3695 in February to establish a regulated botanical psychedelics market by 2027. It is similar to Oregon’s model of professionally facilitated psilocybin-assisted therapy. Notably, this bill includes ibogaine, a promising but controversial drug addiction treatment. It is currently working its way through the state Senate.

In Vermont, state Sen. Martine Gulick’s (D-Chittenden Central District) bill, Senate 114, to create an advisory group on psilocybin decriminalization, was sent to the governor’s desk on May 10.

In Alaska, state Rep. Jennie Armstrong’s (D-District 16) House Bill 228 was approved by the legislature and is awaiting the governor’s signature. If ratified, the legislature would create a task force to recommend regulatory changes should the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approve a psychedelic medicine.

In Maine, state Sen. Donna Bailey (D-District 14) introduced Senate Bill 1914 to create a regulated market. However, the bill was watered down through amendments to create a commission charged with studying and making recommendations about structuring a regulated market.

In Rhode Island, state Rep. Brandon Potter’s (D-District 16) bill, House Bill 7047, which would have temporarily removed penalties for possessing psilocybin until mid-2026, was given an unfavorable ruling by the House’s Judiciary Committee in February and is unlikely to pass this year.

In New York, Assemblywoman Amy Paulin (D-District 88) introduced AB 10375 to allow adult cultivation and sharing of psilocybin once a consumer obtains a permit. A permit requires a health screening and educational courses.

Massachusetts gears up for ballot initiative qualification
A Massachusetts ballot initiative to legalize the non-commercial sharing of botanical psychedelics and create a regulated framework similar to Colorado’s proposition 122 is making steady progress towards qualifying for this November’s ballot. And, just like in Colorado, many political and public health institutions are lining up to oppose it.

One group, reportedly associated with Massachusetts General Hospital, has filed paperwork to oppose the measure because of a provision that allows homegrown psilocybin. Additionally, a joint committee from the legislature has released a report arguing that personal possession would undermine a state-regulated therapy program.

Reason Foundation has responded with a commentary arguing that the ballot initiative would not be a threat to public health and would provide access to potentially life-changing psychedelics.

Colorado considers restrictions on drug-related speech
In Colorado, Senate Bill 158 stalled in the House’s Committee on Education in May. The bill was ostensibly designed to protect minors on social media platforms. Social media companies would have to collect sensitive information to verify a minor’s age and retain this information so that their security processes could be audited. It also would have imposed new requirements on social media companies to ban any user accounts that advertised illicit activities, such as drug use and unlawful firearm sales.

Reason Foundation published an opinion piece detailing how the bill, among other issues, would restrict personal and corporate speech related to products that are fully legal under state law, including psychedelics.

Sponsors appear poised for a renewed push in the next session.


***BEGINNING DOCUMENT***

Commentary
State psychedelics legalization and policy roundup — March 2024
The current state proposals fall into a few broad categories, primarily regulated access and decriminalization of psychedelics.
 
Gregory Ferenstein
March 28, 2024
 
 
 
This post is part of an ongoing series summarizing state-based psychedelic reforms intended for policy professionals. 

The 2024 legislative season is in full swing, with several states proposing some form of psychedelic legalization. The current state proposals fall into a few broad categories, primarily regulated access and decriminalization of psychedelics.

Regulated access
The most popular psychedelics proposal in statehouses nationwide is the creation of state systems for regulated, in-person, professionally guided experiences in clinical facilities. Oregon first pioneered this approach when voters approved Measure 109 in 2020.

In California, state Sen. Scott Weiner (D-San Francisco) introduced Senate Bill 1012 as a response to Gov. Gavin Newsom vetoing his bill last year that would have decriminalized personal possession and cultivation of some botanical psychedelics. In his veto message, Gov. Newsom asked for a bill that includes “therapeutic guidelines.” Weiner’s office has interpreted this to mean an Oregon-style market.

In Arizona, the state Senate passed a similar regulated access bill, Senate Bill 1570, from state Sen. T.J. Shope (R-District 8). Politically, this psychedelics bill is interesting because it got half its Senate votes from Republicans and thus far has sailed through Republican-controlled state legislature. And unlike some of its counterparts in deeply blue states like New York, the bill explicitly allows psychedelics to be used for non-medical purposes. The bill would prevent a health agency from requiring a diagnosis for services.

In Hawaii, both chambers have introduced a bill that would essentially create the same regulated framework of professionally guided therapy but with a slight legal twist that gives certified facilitators an affirmative defense against prosecution for providing therapy under approved conditions. The bill does not provide a system for manufacturing, so it seems that patients would have to cultivate the substances themselves.

In Maine, state Sen. Donna Bailey (D-District 14) has introduced Senate Bill 1914, which legalizes personal cultivation of up to four ounces of dried mushrooms and creates a system for professionally guided services. As of this writing, it came from back its committee, the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee, with members officially “divided” over whether the bill should pass, but it can still be sent to the full chamber for a vote.

Despite minor variations in the legislative text between the states, nearly all of the proposals for regulated psychedelics access defer most of the specifics about how the market will operate to agency rulemaking. For example, in Arizona, the bill does not specify that the state would allow group-based psychedelic therapy, although the agency of jurisdiction could provide for this through rulemaking.

Decriminalization
Perhaps the most promising psychedelics decriminalization bill comes from New Jersey. Senate Bill 2283 is sponsored by state Senate President Nicholas Scutari (D-District 22), who previously championed the state’s cannabis legalization. The massive bill is similar to Colorado’s Proposition 122, decriminalizing possession and charging the state to create a regulated framework for professional services. The bill only applies to psilocybin.

In Connecticut, state Rep. David Michel (D-District 146) introduced Senate Bill 5297 to decriminalize personal amounts of psilocybin. However, a spokesperson for Gov. Ned Lamont has expressed concerns, which could spell an uphill political battle for the bill.

In Vermont, state Sen. Martine Gulick (D-Chittenden Central District ) introduced a bill, S. 114, to create an advisory group to recommend decriminalizing psilocybin.

In Rhode Island, Representative Brandon Potter (D-District 16) introduced HB 7047, which temporarily removes penalties for possessing psilocybin until mid-2026.

In California, activists from the psychedelic church Zide Door failed to collect enough signatures for a decriminalization ballot initiative and announced they would attempt to get on the ballot in 2026.

Reason Foundation research director Geoff Lawrence offered commentary on the different approaches to psychedelics legalization for Double Blind

Ohio looks to become the next frontier for ibogaine research
Ohio policymakers are exploring the potential of ibogaine for the treatment of opioid addiction and other conditions. Bryan Hubbard will spearhead a public-private partnership between the Reaching Everyone in Distress (REID) Foundation and the state treasurer’s office. Hubbard resigned from his post as the chair of the Kentucky Opioid Abatement Advisory Commission after the incoming state attorney general disagreed with his effort to allocate a portion of settlement funds restricted for opioid abatement initiatives toward ibogaine clinical trials.

Reason Foundation recently published a policy brief compiling the available research on using ibogaine as a potential treatment for opioid addiction and comparing its effectiveness to existing treatments like methadone or buprenorphine.

Colorado’s professional guide market is taking shape
Colorado’s Proposition 122 charged the state with creating a regulated framework for psychedelic-assisted therapy. A board of appointed experts is directed to make recommendations to public agencies, who will ultimately draft the new regulations. Both the board and agencies have held ongoing meetings.

After months of deliberation, The Natural Medicine Advisory Board has completed its draft recommendations on facilitator regulations. The Colorado Department of Revenue’s Natural Medicine Division will host rulemaking meetings and seek public input over the coming months before its final rulemaking for the upcoming regulated psychedelics market. The draft rules are largely similar to those in Oregon, which require over 100 hours of curriculum at approved schools and hands-on experience.

The most recent rulemaking meeting was held on March 20, and the next one is planned for April 10. Some standout proposed rules differ from Oregon’s model:

Unlike Oregon, Colorado’s model will permit psychedelics-assisted therapy for mental health issues. Oregon’s is technically “adult use” and is explicitly not for mental health treatment. But, in Colorado, the proposed rule states that facilitators may only practice psychedelic medicine if they already hold a license to treat specific illnesses.
A “training” license would be offered for students to gain experience and earn money facilitating psychedelic sessions before being certified to facilitate on their own. This license was based on the common apprenticeship system used in indigenous cultures.
A distinguished educator license is meant to allow training programs to “import” qualified teachers in the early stages of the new market when not many Colorado school graduates have experience. A distinguished educator could have received a license from Oregon or someone who can demonstrate significant expertise in psychedelics.
One of the easier licenses to obtain, a “facilitator license,” comes with a restriction against overseeing people who fall under a list of contraindicated illnesses, including psychosis and bipolar disorder.
The training requirements allow up to 50% of the educational curriculum (“didactic”) to be virtual. However, they must be “synchronous,” meaning it must be a live class and can’t simply be a recording or reading assignment.
Trainees are required to do an additional 50 hours of consultations with someone experienced in psychedelic facilitation, in addition to around 150 hours of curriculum and 40 hours of practicum.
Join us for a taping of The Reason Interview in New York City
Reason’s Nick Gillespie will record an episode of The Reason Interview podcast with Kat Murti, executive director of Students for Sensible Drug Policy, on May 8th in New York City. Full details and tickets are available here.

Gregory Ferenstein is a senior fellow in drug policy at Reason Foundation.


***BEGINNING DOCUMENT***

This document is a transcript of a meeting of a colorado regulatory agency on fees to be placed on businesses that register to sell psilocybin services.

The agency noted that they will need to hire 9 full time staff so that they can respond to businesses that have questions and submit applications to get a license. Audience members expressed serious concern that the license fees that range between $4,000 to $14,000 will prohibit small businesses.

The rest of the transcript is below

Speaker 1  0:04  
All right, we will get started here. Good afternoon, welcome on behalf of the Natural Medicine Division, appreciate both our online attendees and seeing nice in person. Presence here. We appreciate the time you took to be here. A reminder, as you heard, we are recording this meeting. Today is Wednesday. It is August. 28 2024 it is 3:01pm. My name is Dominique Mendiola, and I serve as the Senior Director for the Colorado Department of Revenue's Natural Medicine Division. So today we are hosting our fee rulemaking work group meeting as the part of establishing a regulatory framework for regulated natural medicine here in Colorado, we will start our meeting with a presentation about the fee rulemaking process our legislative directive to set fees that are sufficient to cover the direct and indirect cost of administering this regulatory program and the data and assumptions that informed these proposed fees that we will be presenting today. We anticipate the majority of this presentation and discussion will focus on application and compliance fees for those who want to operate natural medicine facilities in the regulated space. I am joined by my co chairs, Kyle Lambert to my left and Allison Robinette to my right. Additionally, we have Amelia Myers online with the Natural Medicine Division. We have Heather Draper on our communications team here in person, as well as we have online at Travis Haley and Christy Piazza with the Department of Revenue, please note that also Heather Draper, on our team, is our main point of contact for any immediate request. So any, if any of those come in, we will be routing those to our colleague, Heather. We are, I believe, online, also joined by Ian SEAB, the governor, Special Advisor on cannabis and natural medicine. Finally, from the Colorado Department of Law. We have Ross hougarhide And Christy D Maria online, and we have Paige Olson here with us in person, all who represent the Department of Revenue's Natural Medicine Division from the Attorney General's office, and they're advising us as a division as needed. All right, so we're going to move on to our next slide here. So the just covering the responsibilities of the state licensing authority within the Department of Revenue, and that's the state licensing authority is the executive director of our department, the Colorado natural medicine code, directs the state licensing authority, who, as I noted, is the executive director for the Department of Revenue. Department of Revenue to license and regulate healing centers, cultivations, manufacturers and laboratory testing facilities, as well as the individuals and entities that own those facilities and employees who handle natural medicine at these facilities, we will be again accepting applications for licenses later this year, so December 31 is when at the earliest, we will start accepting applications from folks who would like to be licensed in this space. In addition to licensing and regulating natural medicine facilities, the state licensing authority and the Natural Medicine Division has a number of other powers and duties or responsibilities, including around data reporting that we must do public education and first responder training materials we must develop, establishing a testing program for laboratory testing and to ensure that products are not contaminated and that we are addressing any required testing that's mandated in the law or otherwise to protect public health and safety. Also, we are directed to create an inventory tracking system or mechanism, so a process for tracking inventory. And so that is an area that in some of these are subjects in which we discussed in our previous rulemaking, where we just recently adopted our first set of substantive rules in the space. Also we are directed to take measures to prevent youth access and ensuring that we the work we're doing includes establishing an equitable and inclusive program that prevents exploitation and commercialization. We at the Department of Revenue and our partners at Dora, so the Department of regulatory agencies are working through separate processes for implementation of the natural medicine regulatory program. So we want to be clear about that and ensure that you are tracking the work of each agency based on your area of interest. So when it comes to our partners at Dora, the Department of regulatory agencies. Their work focuses on facilitator Licensing and Regulation. So those are the individuals who be licensed to to provide those administration services also, oh, and I think we're sharing a link to their web page, so you have that information, and then we have our partners at. The Public Health Department. So we oftentimes refer to them as CD PHE, the Department of Public Health and Environment, their work will primarily focus on laboratory testing certification and related requirements. So they are supporting the work necessary to establish the testing program for regulated products. Now for us at the Department of Revenue Dor, the purpose of our meeting today is noted is to discuss initial draft regulations for application and compliance fees. I'm now going to hand it over to my colleague Allison, who's going to take us through an update on participation, interest and expectations as everything we work on today will be a part of our formal rulemaking record. Great. Thanks. Dominique and hello everyone. Alison Robin Eddie serves the director of policy and regulatory affairs. So just a few housekeeping matters before we dive into the presentation. As a reminder for those who've recently joined us, this meeting is being recorded. That recording will be posted on our website before the end of the day tomorrow, at the latest. Last week, we distributed the agenda as well as the draft of proposed fees that we'll use to discuss guide today's discussion, and all the materials for our work group meetings, including the agenda draft rules, are saved one week before the meeting in our public resources folder. So if you haven't gone around, gone into that folder and looked at what's available, I encourage everyone to do so that chat or that link has been shared in the chat, but for folks in person, we also will put our slide deck with all the links we're sharing on our website tomorrow too. So just as a reminder that is available, bookmark that folder. I think it'll be really useful as we continue through this implementation work and as we create more resources outside of rulemaking that'll be helpful once we get into accepting applications in December. If you have not yet, please sign in online using the online form. Everyone here has signed in. Thank you very much, and this is where you can know whether you want to make a comment during the public comment period today, if you're online, please make sure that your microphone is muted when you are not speaking, and the chat in the Zoom has been disabled. Though, you can still send chats to myself and Amelia Myers, who's online. Please keep in mind these chats are recorded as well. However, if you have comments on the rules, we really invite you to make those as part of today's discussion, because other stakeholders may have similar comments. If you're interested in making comments on the materials, we ask that you keep those comments to three minutes, and you will be expected to sign up to provide those comments. When we open up the floor, we ask that you introduce yourself in any organization you represent. If you're joining our zoom meeting by phone, you can use star six to raise to unmute and unmute. And if needed, we may interrupt folks just to remind you to introduce yourself so everyone can be tracking who's speaking. We'll monitor the queue to make sure we're reserving enough time for everyone who wants to make a comment to be able to do so. And of course, we are touching on many different meetings today, and so if you reach the end of your first three minute limit, you're welcome to sign up again, and if there is time, we will circle back through anyone who has additional comments to make during today's discussion and comment period, we like to know whether you agree or disagree with the draft proposal, the reason for your position, and any alternative approach you think we should be considering to the extent you disagree with what's proposed. Additionally, we ask that folks refrain from using this form to promote products or services. And finally, as we've noted throughout this whole process that we started this time last year, please continue to be respectful of not only each other, but also this process. Everyone has been very curious and respectful so far, and so we really appreciate that, and just invite folks to continue on with that expectation.

Speaker 1  8:46  
Great. So before Allison gets into detail around the fee rulemaking process, because we just want to do provide an overview of what this process looks like, what to expect, and how we are going to be engaging in this process with all of you as our stakeholders, I first want to, as we oftentimes do in any of our rulemakings, focus on a set of guiding principles that guide our approach to rulemaking. So with that, these principles state that we should really collectively strive to ensure that rules are transparent, in that rules clearly communicate expectations of licensees, that rules are systematic, meaning compliance can be planned and carried out, that rules should be operable, such that licensees can reasonably integrate rule requirements into their process, and the division can appropriately monitor and determine compliance. Finally, rules should be defensible, and really they need to be defensible, which means they need to be grounded in the law. So those are just primary principles that we will look to as we engage in this process. And I think this was noted already, but want to encourage again, please remember. To sign up using the online sign up form. For those online listening, we are going to be taking comments in the order that folks sign up if you are considering and making comments today, recognizing that you may not know whether you're going to make comments yet, until you hear aspects of our presentation. So Allison, thanks. So we're going to start our presentation today with just a brief overview of the APA or the rulemaking process, recognizing we gave this same presentation back in March, but that's been several months ago, so prior to initiating rulemaking for those initial requirements regarding application licensing standards for operators in the regulated program, we held a listening session all about the rulemaking process, the requirements, and we went into pretty good detail in that and so recognizing, if you've recently joined these rulemaking conversations, you may not have that background, I would invite everyone to go check out that recording. It's not very long, and has a lot of really helpful information. So we'll share that chat as well, or share that link in the chat as well. So the rulemaking process is governed by the State Administrative Procedure Act, and that's a part of the law in the Colorado Revised Statutes, the APA requires the division to solicit input from a representative group of participants with interest in the rulemaking that may be affected either positively or negatively by the proposed rules, or in this case, the proposed fees. The Division uses the input we gather through these public forums, through our written comment form, to inform what those final proposed fees will look like. To officially initiate the fee rulemaking process, the division filed a notice of proposed rulemaking the Secretary of State's office earlier this month, now we're holding our meeting to solicit that feedback. And the timing of which all of this happens is prescribed by the Administrative Procedure Act approximately one week before our hearing, which will be later in September. We will post the final proposed fees on our website, and we will distribute them similar to how we distributed the draft fee today, as well as the agenda leading up to during and up until 5pm on the day of our hearing on September 16. We accept all comments, written comments through our online submission form. You can email comments, if that's the best way for you to do that, or provide them in these meetings. After the hearing, the state licensing will the state licensing authority reviews all of the material we've collected and all the input we've collected from stakeholders. The APA requires that no rule shall be adopted unless the record for the rulemaking proceeding demonstrates the need for the regulation, the proper statutory authority exists for the regulation to the extent practical regulation is clearly and simply stated, so that its meaning will be understood by any party required to comply that the rule does not conflict with any other provisions of law, and the duplication or overlapping of regulations is explained by the agency proposing the rule. So that's that's very legalese jargon from the law, but those are the sort of the standards of what the state licensing authority will be looking at and evaluating when determining whether to adopt these fees. Rules must be adopted within 180 days after the last public hearing on the proposed rule. So there's quite a bit of time after the hearing for additional consideration, and once the state licensing authority has adopted the rule, the division will file final rules in a statement of adoption with the Secretary of State. At this stage, for all intents and purposes, the rule is final. However, the APA requires that the division request an opinion from the Attorney General's Office on the constitutionality and legality of the rule, as well as a review by the sorry, by the Office of Legislative legal services, who works with the General Assembly to ensure that any rules adopted are within the authority delegated to the agency. So for purposes of the fee setting, we anticipate the fees will be adopted in October with our we're hoping for an effective date in mid November to allow anyone who's interested in applying ample time to prepare those applications ahead of December 31 so just wanted to make sure everyone was aware of that. So again, we just look forward to the feedback we can gather through this process to help inform what those final proposed fees look like so moving into more specific requirements that were adopted under Senate Bill 290, and Senate Bill 24, 198, which was this past legislative session, the natural medicine code has several provisions that specifically address fees the state licensing authority is directed to collect and which fund the natural medicine cash fund. First, the code creates the cash fund and states money in the fund can be appropriated by the General Assembly to the Department of Revenue for the direct and indirect costs associated with implementing the natural medicine code. Second, the code requires that the state licensing authority's rule include a schedule of application licensing and renewal. Fees for licenses. As you can see on our screen here, the language regarding fees covering the direct and indirect cost of administering the program, is also reflected in Section 4410, 601, which states that fees must reflect actual direct and indirect cost of administration and enforcement of the code. And finally, this is simply the first fee setting rulemaking for initial rollout of the regulated program. And the law requires the Department to review fees at least annually and to adjust fees either up or down as needed to reflect those direct and indirect costs. So while the statute requires at least annual review, we anticipate kind of consistently monitoring and reviewing our fees, and are prepared to engage in fear rulemaking as necessary. So in addition to application renewal and license fees, the code also authorizes the state licensing authority to propagate other rules as necessary for the comprehensive administration of the regulated natural medicine program, which includes authority to issue fines as a result of licensing non compliance, while fees, fines and other payments are all sent to the natural medicine cash fund. It is critical that the cash fund balance is driven by those application license and compliance fees, rather than fines resulting from administrative actions. So what we're looking at today is really just focused on applications, licenses, renewal fees. The cash fund is a model common among state agencies with similar regulatory roles, including our partners at the Department of regulatory agencies, natural medicine program for facilitators. So because the cash fund requirement requires that these cover those costs, and as we stated during our previous rulemaking process, we wanted to delay and wait to do this fee roll making until we really had a clear picture of what those requirements would look like and what would be required for us as the division to then go forth and enforce those regulations. So I'm going to hand it over to Dominique to talk through sort of program funding our anticipated fees and resource needs. Great. Thank you, Allison, so when the department was delegated authority under Senate Bill 290 to regulate natural medicine operations and carry out other duties and responsibilities that I had summarized earlier, we were granted a two year funding runway from the legislature, meaning the initial implementation of this program is funded through general funding, and this funding expires in July of 2025 this is similar to the process we saw early in when standing up Colorado's cannabis program, where there was initial funding provided to support the stand up of that program. Before then the program needed to be in is expected by law to be sustainable off of application and license fees, so it's similarly a cash funded program, and that's where we're looking at the experience there to see how that informs our following through with the requirements with this program. So because the initial general funds are for a set period of time, whatever funding that remains in july 2025

Speaker 1  18:05  
is expected to revert back to the general fund, and at that point, the department's natural medicine program must be self sustainable. With that in mind, our team has taken what we really work to be a thoughtful and conservative approach to projections and assumptions that inform these initial proposed fees, and we're going to walk through those in more detail in just a moment. We are here with every interest in being transparent and providing this information and soliciting input from all of you that can help provide certainty and stability for those who are interested in operating a license, while also ensuring the fees established through this process are sufficient to cover the division's expected expenses, as directed by the law. With each legislative initiative, state agencies are asked to evaluate any proposed legislation that may impact that agency's operations for fiscal impact. So if there's any bill during the legislative session that the Department of Revenue is responsible for implementing, that's when we get involved in the process and provide input around what we expect some of the impacts to be in ensuring operability. So essentially, the fiscal note process allows state agencies to identify operational programming or other impacts driven by the mandates in the bill and what requires specific resources, such as additional staffing or funding to implement measures. And another aspect, as I touched on, was programming. So licensing. We have a licensing database already within the department of revenue that a number of divisions use, so this would involve an enhancement to that existing database to then provide a pathway to allow for our licensing system to include the processing of natural medicine. Applications, we also want to make sure we're considering enhancements necessary to make the process available online so that people aren't just having to make appointments and come in. Where are we providing convenience to prospective applicants who want to leverage an online process for submitting their application, so that we're providing that ease of navigating the process? So those are all things that we think about that inform those fiscal impacts. Okay, so continuing through here. Fiscal notes are drafted by staff who work for the General Assembly, and they include the information provided by state agencies. So information we submit in the process, and then the staff who work on these fiscal notes, who work at the General Assembly, they then will put dollar amounts to the resource impacts that state agencies have identified for Senate Bill 290 the division estimated that it would require approximately 19 staff by january 2026, to carry out the duties and responsibilities mandated in the bill. This estimated staffing level informed the fiscal note data that we're going to walk through the fiscal note for Senate Bill 290 and that is available online on the General Assembly's website. If you go to Senate Bill 290 and I think it's 23 dash, 290 there's a section. If you scroll down, you'll see a fiscal section where you can see all the drafts of that through the process. So that fiscal note included both that general fund appropriation we just talked about, as well as projections and assumptions to inform required fees. The fiscal note included revenue projections for this year so FY 24 through 25 when the program comes online and general funding expires. And so I think that has so reflected in the table on the left side with a blue heading. And next year, so fiscal year, 2526 you see it on the right side with green heading, as you can see, for initial rollout, the fiscal note identified estimated populations in the number affected column for each license type and a proposed fee to go with that license type in order to generate the necessary revenue to fund the program. I will note here that the table you see is slightly different than what is reflected in the fiscal note, because the fiscal note combined dor issued licenses with facilitator licenses, which our partners at Dora will be issuing. So we're trying to make sure we're focusing on the scope of work that the department of revenue is doing. So that's where you'll see some of the distinction. Additionally, the fiscal note contemplated combined cultivation and manufacturer licenses and did not contemplate owner licenses. So those are new elements that we need to be thinking about that are distinct in the law and in our rules, the fiscal note makes assumptions about the number affected or estimated licensee population. And as you can see, the fiscal note estimated initially around 80 natural medicine business license applications or operators, and twice as many license applications in the second year of the program. Additionally, the fiscal note set fees for each license, and you can see that number at 2000 $116 annually, recognizing there are different resource needs based on license type and that there will be varying numbers of different licenses, the division did not propose an across the board fee for different types of licenses. So for example, the fiscal note contemplated a fee of, as I mentioned, 2000 116 for employee licenses, which we have not incorporated into the draft fee rules. So moving forward, so focusing on our Colorado licensee estimates based on our participant survey that we conducted this spring, recognizing it's not capturing everyone, but it gives us an initial idea of what we might expect, and also current application and licensing data from Oregon. That's another area, again, recognizing there's some distinctions and programs that we need to keep in mind, but still another place to inform what this process entails and how that informs where we should land. With fees, we estimate that the regulated natural medicine licensee population will be significantly less than what the fiscal note estimated, in part because of the broad personal use provisions in the law, and based on the level of participation, we've seen an ordinance program. So then proceeding forward with the table projected when we're looking at the number of licensees, we are projecting with this information, the division is proposing conservative projections for the number of applicants who will those individuals who will come in and apply for and obtain owner, natural medicine handler. So that's like your employee and a natural medicine business license. These projections, which are included in the notice we filed and distributed contemplate in. Initial surge of applications, including approximately 300 owner licenses. This number includes both owners who are not facilitators and facilitators who seek to own and operate natural medicine business licenses and would be subject to a lower fee because they've already been, you know, vetted in part through the DORA process as a licensed facilitator. So also between, we're looking at between 500 and 1000 employees who will be handling natural medicine at a licensed facility, again, including both non facilitators and facilitators who choose to be licensed by the division. In addition to Dora, we are anticipating, just again, projecting 25 healing centers, a majority of which we anticipate will be micro healing centers, or we established a certain level of micro license category, 24 cultivation facilities, again, looking at the majority of which we anticipate to be standard, because we also have that standard, and then different levels associated with that, and then 25 product manufacturers, 10 of which we anticipate will seek to obtain an extraction endorsement, and that's something that we established in the set of rules that were just recently adopted that provided for an allowance to make additional types of products, and then two testing facilities to conduct required, regulated natural medicine testing. So that covers the general overview of what we are projecting, and covered some of the context as to why we're landing there. So now getting into resource needs that are tied to this, now that we have a bit of a clear picture of the regulatory structure and requirements for regulated natural medicine operations. We've taken time over the last few weeks to think critically about our resources, what those needs are to not only enforce those regulations, but also carry out the division and departments other regulatory responsibilities. And when it comes to the work of regulating, we also want to ensure that we are deliberately creating space to support compliance and not just focusing on enforcement and taking enforcement action. That's where can we ensure we're resource to support the successful operations in this space based on the final rules and other statutory obligations. The Division is aiming to hire up to nine FTE, so nine staff to support the implementation and administration of the natural medicine program. And so you can see how that's distinct from the earlier mention of the projected 19 we're really looking to based on the more conservative numbers, see how that ties into our projected nine staff

Speaker 1  27:43  
the division is, as I mentioned, intentionally planning for fewer staff and lean operating costs than the fiscal note contemplated based on our more conservative licensing projections and to keep application and license fees as low as possible, we believe This can incentivize participation and lessen barriers to entry to the regulated program. This approach will require efficient leveraging of existing resources within the Department of Revenue and taking a deliberate approach to hiring to ensure that the budget can support hiring team members. The revenue generated from fees directly informs the level of customer service the division can provide, as well. I mentioned, you know, licensing services we want to be sure we're providing, to provide provide ease of access and how people can submit applications, make payments and communicate with the division. Of course, we've thought through, you know, licensed services the proposed fees will support and as I mentioned, those licensing services, both in person and online services, the process for application review, ongoing compliance support, on site investigation, staffing and stakeholder and policy support for future iterations of the rules. As we noted, we want to make sure that as these new substantive rules that were just adopted get to a point of being put into practice, as operations begin, we want to make sure we are keeping on top of where there could be issues in play that we might need to respond to quickly, where are we seeing operability challenges. So we want to make sure that we're prepared to assess and act as we need to to ensure the operability and viability of this program. So also the division is required to generate, as I mentioned earlier, public education campaigns to collect and report certain data that's available, provide training materials to first responders, support local law enforcement, and also we've you know that's consistent and complementary to efforts that we've already taken just to create awareness across the state so that folks understand, including law enforcement partners, what the current state of the law provides, what is, what are legal actions in the space on both the personal use? And as we work to stand up this program, also our mention of inventory tracking and so a need to establish a process for that, as we have already started and the rules that were just adopted and enforcing regulations as and as a partner with other state agencies, I mentioned the Public Health Department and Dora is examples of partner agencies who we will need to make sure that we're continuing to collaborate with, coordinate with closely so nine staff will help us is we see comply with the minimum mandates and responsibilities currently reflected in the natural medicine code. However, this will be a lean staff with limited resources for operational costs which will affect turnaround times on things like application review, responding to inquiries, adverse health event responses, on site, business inspections. So those are all things that we need to consider is, how does our staffing level ensure or impact or limit our ability to carry out those duties. This could also limit the technologies the division can leverage to support things like data reporting and publishing. For example, we will continually be evaluating a licensed population operational efficiencies. Those are things we want to always be looking out for and opportunities to leverage existing department resources within the code's delegated authority. And I don't know if we got into that, but just as one example with splitting so the three of us here at UC are also working for the Marijuana Enforcement Division, and so as a part of that, so I'm also the Senior Director for the Marijuana Enforcement Division, and Kyle is serving as the deputy for the Marijuana Enforcement Division as well. And Allison Merville is director of policy and regulatory affairs also for both divisions. So that is a part of effort to see where our involvement can support efficiencies and implementation so less full time staff that we would otherwise be looking for to fill the roles and gaps that we are working to fill in this space, and seeing where we can continue to leverage that opportunity. Because not only does that provide some relief to the marijuana cash fund, it also means less of an impact on the natural medicine cash fund, because it is literally looking at splitting our responsibilities and how our how we are funded as a staff. So additionally, we are exploring ways to alleviate the impacts and barriers to entry while we don't have clarity or certainty regarding participation in the regulated program. So that's just an area we want to continue to monitor is, what other sources of data, what are we seeing continue to develop in Oregon? What information do you all, as our stakeholders, have that can help us really maintain the line of sight to and track sort of how that informs adjustments to the population projections that we currently have in mind, because we are ready to see how that might shift and inform needs for more conversation, to suggest there are more resource needs than we thought, or we can see opportunities for reductions of fees. So those are things we want to keep an eye out for. Finally, as I mentioned, I think mentioned commenting on some of these things, and then I see it's a talking point I'm supposed to hit on. Finally, we are prepared to reevaluate these annually, and that is, as Allison mentioned, directed by statute, if and if necessary. You know, looking at it more frequently to ensure we're striking that appropriate balance we recognize and appreciate the potential applicants in this regulated space will be coming into this framework with varying experiences, varying visions of what their engagement looks like. And we anticipate there will be, you know, cultivators and manufacturers who are passionate about the safe and thoughtful cultivation and production of natural medicine and intend to partner with licensed facilitators. We also anticipate licensed facilitators who wish to operate a fully integrated program, which includes cultivating, manufacturing and administering natural medicine at a healing center that they own and integrate or and operate and are integrating this modality into their other offerings in some areas. So Kyle is going to take us through more detail, and it's worth just emphasizing that the reason for the proposed fee approach is our team's goal to create these various pathways for interested applicants based on how they want to engage in this space. Okay. Thank you. Dominique, the so we're going to move into the proposed rules and the red line. So the first section we're going to discuss before we take comments today, are the initial application and compliance fees, excuse me, and that is in Rule 2005, paragraph a on pages one and two, the adopted. Rules already contemplate that only the application fee is due at the time of application and that the license compliance fee would be due upon application approval. With regard to fees, the division's proposed fee structure includes a phased fee approach, which seeks to incentivize applications during the first year of the program at lower application and license fees. Initial license application fees are proposed to be the lowest fees for applicants, and these lower fees would be effective through the end of 2025 with an increase to fees in 2026 the division proposed this phased approach in part to incentivize participation in the regulated program. Additionally, the purpose behind this ramp up approach is to give licensees time to settle into this program, keep barriers to entry low for folks interested in participating, and provide an opportunity for licensees to establish their operations at these lower costs while being able to plan for the long term license and compliance related costs for participation. And as we just discussed, regarding our conservative estimates of applicant and licensee populations, if we estimate the population of licensees too low, then fees may be higher than necessary, and if we estimate the population of license, of licensees too high, then fees will not cover the direct and indirect costs. So this initial fee setting is a delicate balance between incentivizing participation by lowering barriers to entry while also accounting for division needs to administer the program. The initially proposed fees are intentionally lower to leverage the remaining funding received from the general fund, to leverage the expected volume of initial applications in the first year and to allow licensees to establish their operational models, followed by a ramping up of fees in years two and three of the program, these initial application fees at this lower level will only be available to applicants for the first 12 months of the program, moving on to the renewal and compliance fees, for the same reasons we just covered those licensees who apply for and obtain licenses during 2025 would benefit from lower renewal application and compliance fees On their first renewal, which is reflected in paragraph b1, on pages two and three, for renewal applications submitted after December 31 2026

***document***
https://www.cbsnews.com/video/deas-anne-milgram-compares-ketamine-abuse-with-beginning-of-opioid-epidemic/

DEA's Anne Milgram compares ketamine abuse with beginning of opioid epidemic
Following the arrests last week in connection with Matthew Perry's death from a ketamine overdose, DEA administrator Anne Milgram on "Face the Nation with Margaret Brennan" compares ketamine abuse to the beginning of the opioid epidemic, and says the DEA is targeting doctors and practitioners "who are violating this duty of trust to their patients by over-prescribing medicine, or prescribing medicine that isn't necessary."

*** document ***

The National Institutes of Health will put $2.4 million toward funding studies on the use of psychedelics to treat methamphetamine use disorders, researchers announced this week. The money comes as federal health officials note sharp increases in deaths from methamphetamine and other psychostimulants in recent years, with fatal overdoses involving the substances rising nearly fivefold between 2015 and 2022.

Recipients of the new five-year grant from the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) include researchers at the University of California San Diego’s (UCSD) Center for Psychedelic Research, Louisiana State University (LSU) Health Shreveport and the Medical College of Wisconsin (MCW).

“There are currently no pharmacological treatments for methamphetamine addiction” MCW professor John McCorvy, one of the grant recipients, said in a news release, adding that the project’s findings “could ultimately pave the way for new therapeutic approaches to treat stimulant use disorder, impacting the lives of so many who are coping with addiction.”

Cannabis-Derived CBD May Improve the Lives of Those With Autism
0 seconds of 30 secondsVolume 0%
 

Beyond studying whether or not psychedelic treatment might be a promising therapy to treat methamphetamine addiction, the research is also aimed at pinning down the underlying mechanisms behind the beneficial effects of psilocybin and other entheogens. Ultimately, the goal is to develop psychedelics-related drugs that treat underlying health conditions but don’t produce a psychedelic experience.

“Psychedelics appear to have significant therapeutic activity against different types of substance abuse and other psychiatric disorders,” said Adam Halberstadt, director of the UCSD Center for Psychedelic Research and another grant recipient. “However, existing psychedelics induce intensive psychoactive effects and can also induce side-effects in some individuals, complicating the clinical use of these substances and restricting their widespread application.”

“Our project seeks to understand the mechanism for the therapeutic effects of psychedelics against methamphetamine addition,” Halberstadt continued, “potentially enabling development of a new generation of molecules with effects that are much more manageable and better tolerated.”

The team is particularly interested in the serotonin receptor 5-HT2A, which is associated with psychedelic effects.

“Our research aims to unravel the precise mechanisms through which psychedelics influence the 5-HT2A receptor,” McCorvey said, “understanding that could lead to lessening their psychoactive effect and open the door to new treatments.”

Reducing the entheogenic effects of psychedelics, the group says, could facilitate regular or even daily use.

The push for more effective treatment for methamphetamine use disorder comes amid a general uptick in methamphetamine-related overdose deaths. In the U.S. South and West, the release about the research says, methamphetamine was the most common drug detected in overdose deaths in 2017, outpacing opioids.

That’s part of a broader spike in deaths from methamphetamine and other psychostimulants. According to NIDA data, 34,022 people died from overdoses involving the substances in 2022—up from just 5,716 such deaths recorded in 2015.

“For methamphetamine addiction, the current standard of care involves behavioral treatments with limited success rates over multiple cycles of therapy. This creates a public health imperative to research new and deliver effective therapies for methamphetamine addiction,” said Kevin Murnane, a professor at the Louisiana Addiction Research Center at LSU Health Shreveport. “This research project will advance psychedelics as a promising new treatment option based on reported data in initial clinical studies, as well as our own preliminary research. It will also unlock understanding into key physiological mechanisms that drive methamphetamine addiction, as well as therapeutic response mechanisms, allowing the development of second-generation serotonin agents with improved profiles.”

Past studies have suggested that psychedelics could unlock promising new pathways to treat substance use disorder. Last year, for instance, a first-of-its-kind analysis offered novel insights into exactly how psychedelic-assisted therapy works for people addicted to alcohol.

NIDA, the federal agency that provided the new $2.4 million grant, last year announced a $1.5 million funding round to further study psychedelics and addiction.

Earlier this year, meanwhile, the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH), which is part of the National Institutes of Health, identified the treatment of alcohol use disorder as one of a number of possible benefits of psilocybin, despite the substance remaining a Schedule I controlled substance under U.S. law.

The agency highlighted a 2022 study that “suggested that psilocybin may be helpful for alcohol use disorder.” The research found people who were in psilocybin-assisted therapy had fewer heavy-drinking days over 32 weeks than the control group, which NCCIH said “suggests that psilocybin may be helpful for alcohol use disorder.”

Findings of another recent study suggest that the use of full-spectrum psychedelic mushroom extract has a more powerful effect than chemically synthesized psilocybin alone, which could have implications for psychedelic-assisted therapy. The findings imply that the experience of entheogenic mushrooms may involve a so-called “entourage effect” similar to what’s observed with cannabis and its many components.

A separate study recently published by the American Medical Association found that single-dose psilocybin use was “not associated with risk of paranoia,” while other adverse effects such as headaches are generally “tolerable and resolved within 48 hours.”

Separately, research from 2019 indicated that CBD may also have the potential to treat substance use disorders involving cocaine, amphetamine and methamphetamine—adding to earlier research showing the cannabinoid has the potential to help people battling substance use disorders involving alcohol and opioids.

Meanwhile, the government has for years been funding research into the development of psychedelics-related drugs that don’t cause a psychedelic trip, working to decouple the potential health benefits of entheogens from the psychedelic experience.

In 2020, for example, a project funded by $26.9 million from the U.S. Department of Defense’s Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) “aims to create new medications to effectively and rapidly treat depression, anxiety, and substance abuse without major side effects.”

“Although drugs like ketamine and potentially psilocybin have rapid antidepressant actions, their hallucinogenic, addictive, and disorienting side effects make their clinical use limited,” project leader Bryan L. Roth, a professor of pharmacology at the University of North Carolina School of Medicine, said at the time.


***BEGINNING DOCUMENT***
Published in The Hill

Psychedelics are a mental health miracle — so why is the FDA holding back? 

by Leonard Gilroy and Greg Ferenstein, opinion contributors  - 08/18/24 1:00 PM ET


The U.S. Food and Drug Administration just rejected an application that would have authorized the use of a promising psychedelic compound, MDMA, for the treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder, a condition affecting 13 million Americans, In its denial, the FDA suggested the company, Lykos Therapeutics, instead conduct another large study — a proposal that could take years. 

Fortunately, states need not wait for the sluggish federal bureaucracy to act. Some have already established promising regulations to give veterans, sexual assault survivors and others suffering from PTSD safe and effective access to psychedelic-assisted therapies.  

Psychedelic research has been stymied since the early 1970s due to the failed war on drugs. Even so, there has been a resurgence of medical research and clinical trials into the use of psychedelic compounds like MDMA (commonly known as ecstasy), psilocybin (or so-called magic mushrooms) and ibogaine in the treatment of a wide array of mental health conditions, such as PTSD, anxiety, major depressive and alcohol use disorders. Promising early research results even prompted the FDA to designate MDMA and psilocybin as “breakthrough therapies,” authorizing an expedited path to approval.

But this latest rejection makes it unclear whether the nascent psychedelic pharmaceutical industry will be able to meet FDA’s demands any time soon. 

As a result, state leaders should forge ahead and build upon what is taking place in Oregon and Colorado. Voters in those states approved ballot initiatives legalizing the establishment of licensed and regulated psilocybin therapy centers that provide on-site, adult-only consumption of psilocybin under professional supervision. In November, voters in Massachusetts will vote on a similar law; the New Jersey legislature passed a legalization bill out of committee this summer. 

Red and purple states have also joined the action, with Utah establishing a psilocybin pilot program through the state’s largest healthcare networks and the Republican-controlled Arizona legislature enacting a supervised psilocybin program, which Gov. Katie Hobbs (D) then vetoed. The governor signed another bill that would have allowed Arizona’s police and firefighters to receive coverage for MDMA treatments — if the FDA had approved the Lykos application. 

Veterans, first responders, mental health advocates and neuroscientists have led a national, bipartisan push to shift public perceptions about the potential psychedelics offer to improve mental health outcomes for millions of people suffering from conditions that traditional medicines and therapies have failed to help. 

The Heroic Hearts Project, a nonprofit helping veterans, reports that current FDA-approved treatments are helpful to fewer than 10 percent of veterans suffering from PTSD. In contrast, the group’s research with King’s College, London, “suggests that over 80 percent of veterans experience significant improvement after participating in just one psychedelic program.” 

While the application the FDA rejected would’ve only allowed those with PTSD to be treated, states can pave the way to help many more people with several other conditions. The psychedelic compounds authorized for use in Oregon and Colorado, for instance, are not constrained to a single mental health condition or set of protocols, allowing more individuals and therapists to meet a broader range of mental health needs. 

The Healing Advocacy Fund found over 3,500 clients received psilocybin-assisted therapy in Oregon at the state’s first psilocybin service center in 2023, typically at a fraction of the cost projected for treatment using an eventually FDA-approved MDMA-assisted therapy. 

Even Congress recognizes FDA’s red tape is taking too long and driving up prices. In 2016, lawmakers mandated that the FDA consider “real-world” data when approving a drug. For widely used compounds such as psilocybin and MDMA, the FDA has ample real-world and scientific journal studies showing the benefits and the number of adverse events from millions of users of the drugs. 

However, the FDA still requires drug makers to attempt to blind patients in placebo-controlled trials. In this case, it is extremely difficult to fool a patient into believing he or she received a powerful hallucinogen and not a placebo in a blind study. What’s more, it costs hundreds of millions of dollars and many years to randomly assign patients in clinical trials overseen by large teams. 

The most common concerns about the legalization of psychedelics are worries that it will lead to increases in drug use and crime. Data collected by Reason Foundation show Colorado has not shown an increase in psychedelic-related hospital incidences since legalization, however. Nor has there been a significant change in the number of psychedelic-related crime incidents.

Similarly, since legalization in Oregon, there has been a downward trend in hallucinogen-related DUIs, property crimes and crimes against persons since voters approved regulated, facilitated psychedelic services in 2020. 

With the FDA slow-walking drugs it has already defined as “breakthrough” therapies, state governments have a significant opportunity to take the lead in expanding Americans’ access to transformative, life-saving mental health treatments. The time to move forward is now. 

Leonard Gilroy is the vice president of government reform at the Reason Foundation, where Greg Ferenstein is a senior fellow on psychedelics policy.

***DOCUMENT***

Psychedelics Policy Newsletter
Psychedelics Policy Newsletter: A glimpse into Colorado after psychedelics legalization, a gathering of conservative legislators, and more
Plus: Food and Drug Administration approval of MDMA is tentative, the psychedelic origins of Whole Foods, and more.
 
Gregory Ferenstein
July 31, 2024
 
 
 
Welcome to Reason Foundation’s newsletter on psychedelics policy. This edition covers:

A field report on the impacts of natural medicine legalization on Colorado
A presentation at a gathering of conservative legislators
Commentary on FDA approval of MDMA
The psychedelic origins of Whole Foods
Round-up of state-based policies
A Canadian study of patients
A look at how psychedelic legalization has played out in Colorado
Reason Foundation recently published a glimpse into Colorado’s legal psychedelics scene. The field report assesses the public health impacts of legalizing possession of botanical psychedelics over a year since Proposition 122 was implemented, looks at crime statistics and hospitalization rates, and explores this data with on-the-ground reporting from a variety of psychedelic experiences in Denver. You can the report here.

Reason at ALEC

From Right to Left: Jesse Gould, Leonard Gilroy, Utah State Sen. Kirk Cullimore (R-Sandy), Arizona Senate President Pro Tempore T.J. Shope (R-Pinal County).
Reason Foundation hosted a panel discussion of state-level psychedelic reforms at the American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC) annual meeting, a large gathering of free-market policymakers who debate issues and form model legislative templates for use in states around America.

Reason Foundation Vice President of Government Reform Leonard Gilroy moderated the psychedelics panel, joined by Heroic Hearts Founder Jesse Gould, Utah State Sen. Kirk Cullimore (R-Sandy), Arizona State Senate President Pro Tempore T.J. Shope (R-Pinal County).

After Gould gave background information about the personal experiences of veterans seeking treatment abroad, the lawmakers on the panel spoke about their experiences sponsoring legislation to legalize psychedelic therapies to a full room of attendees.

Arizona’s Shope spoke about his experience passing a bill to legalize professional psilocybin services. The bill was ultimately vetoed by the governor. He took to X (formerly Twitter) after the panel, saying, “I look forward to bringing the bill back to the Legislature next year.”

The FDA can still legalize MDMA
Earlier this month, an advisory panel to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recommended that the agency reject Lykos Therapeutic’s new drug application for an MDMA-based treatment, citing many scientific challenges for the research design.

“It’s hard to have a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial” for a psychedelic substance, acknowledged Lykos Board member Rick Doblin on stage at the Aspen Ideas Festival last June.

Reason Foundation penned a commentary highlighting an existing pathway through which the FDA can still safely approve MDMA for the treatment of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder.

It’s worth noting that shortly after the advisory committee opposed approval, a Dutch Agency recommended that MDMA be approved in the Netherlands.

An FDA decision is expected by Aug. 11.

Whole Foods’ psychedelic origins
Whole Foods co-founder John Mackey published a new book, The Whole Story, which relays the history of the iconic grocery store, including how he drew inspiration through his experiences with psychedelics. Reason Editor at Large Nick Gillespie interviewed Mackey in June, discussing his psychedelic inspiration and political philosophy.

Around the 34:30 mark of the video, Mackey describes how LSD inspired him to seek spirituality and, ultimately, set him on an unorthodox path to creating a healthy grocery store.

State roundup
A ballot initiative to legalize botanical psychedelics has qualified for the upcoming election in Massachusetts. If the ballot initiative in Massachusetts passes, the state would undergo a regulatory process similar to what Colorado has seen.

Reason Foundation experts submitted written comments to the Colorado agencies (Colorado’s Department of Revenue and Department of Regulatory Agencies), which have just concluded public hearings before rendering final rules for a regulated psychedelics market. 

More details about state activity are available in the latest state roundup.

Canada psilocybin study
Canada offers a legal pathway for patients to access psilocybin through a special compassionate use program under medical supervision. A new study in Nature finds that patient experiences have been positive so far.

“These preliminary data are amongst the first to suggest that psilocybin-assisted psychotherapy can produce psychiatric benefits in real-world patients akin to those observed in clinical trials,” the authors conclude.

Gregory Ferenstein is a senior fellow in drug policy at Reason Foundation.

***DOCUMENT***

op-ed by gregory ferenstein

Commentary
Massachusetts should allow psychedelic therapy
A Massachusetts ballot initiative would create a regulated framework for legal, professionally facilitated psychedelic services and therapy. 
 
Gregory Ferenstein
May 9, 2024
 
 
 
Massachusetts, like many states, faces a mental healthcare crisis. Eighteen percent of adults in the state report receiving a depression diagnosis, according to a 2020 report from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Massachusetts voters have the opportunity to legalize access to a great mental health tool: psilocybin. 

Psilocybin, a psychedelic drug, has shown extraordinary promise in treating severe depression and dependency on alcohol or cigarettes—among other behavioral illnesses. Access to psilocybin will likely be on the state’s November ballot through an initiative titled The Natural Psychedelic Substances Act. The ballot initiative would create a regulated framework for legal, professionally facilitated psychedelic services and therapy. 

The act would also guide regulators in determining how to license professional guides and regulate the manufacture and sales of psychedelic substances and infused products. Residents would face no criminal penalties under state law for growing or possessing approved psychedelics or participating in non-commercial psychedelic gatherings for spiritual and mental health purposes.

Many of the state’s public health institutions now have teams dedicated to psychedelics. In 2021, Massachusetts General Hospital opened the Center for Neuroscience of Psychedelics in collaboration with Harvard University and a private pharmaceutical company, Atai Life Sciences, which is currently taking a synthetic version of psilocybin through clinical trials.

The research of Massachusetts General aims to explore exactly how psilocybin is so effective in treating severe depression. However, this will be a long, arduous academic process that will take many years before the research is published in an academic journal, approved by government agencies, and then promulgated through doctor training seminars to ultimately help patients.

The ballot initiative would allow Massachusetts to get ahead of the notoriously slow and costly process of academic research and pharmaceutical approval through the Food and Drug Administration. Multiple pharmaceutical companies have sponsored patented derivatives of psilocybin in FDA-supervised clinical trials, but the initiative could make naturally occurring therapies available immediately.

Eight cities in Massachusetts have already designated enforcing bans on psychedelics as the lowest priority within their jurisdictions. The ballot initiative would go further by removing some criminal penalties under state law and establishing a regulated marketplace for therapeutic use. Oregon and Colorado have already passed similar initiatives that Massachusetts could mimic.

Oregon’s regulated market is already operational. Oregon Public Broadcasting recently interviewed Vivian Anderson, an 88-year-old woman with post-traumatic stress disorder who went through a legal psilocybin treatment in Oregon. Anderson exclaimed, “I’m just happy now that my daily life feels so whole, feels so peaceful and calm. I’m not carrying around this horrible feeling of anxiety.”

Opponents of psychedelics in Colorado initially worried that legalization could lead to widespread drug misuse. However, a Reason Foundation examination found that crime and hospitalization data in the year following Colorado’s legalization does not back up these fears. Hallucinogens represent a mere 0.3% of drug-related hospitalizations in Colorado—a trend that has not changed in the year since possession was legalized.

There is little evidence in Massachusetts that psychedelic use presents a substantial public health or safety issue. Official Massachusetts crime statistics show there were only 153 hallucinogen-related crimes in 2021 and 134 in 2022. In 2022, hallucinogens represented just 1.7% of drug-related crime, while narcotics, such as heroin, represented 68% (5,534 incidents).

Psychedelics are just one prong in a complex mental health strategy. However, clinical research in the past few years shows psychedelics may have remarkable effectiveness in helping individuals overcome a wide range of mental health problems. Massachusetts can and should be the next state to offer this transformative approach to tackling the mental health care crisis. 

Gregory Ferenstein is a senior fellow in drug policy at Reason Foundation.

***DOCUMENT***

Commentary
California should legalize psychedelics and learn from its marijuana regulation mistakes
The state’s high cannabis taxes and burdensome regulations make legal marijuana products expensive and keep the illicit market thriving.
 
Gregory Ferenstein
  
Geoffrey Lawrence
Research Director
May 13, 2024
 
 
 
The decriminalization of psychedelics has become a mainstream policy issue. Following legal reforms in Colorado and Oregon, the California legislature is once again debating a bill that would establish a regulated market of psychedelic therapies. There is a growing body of medical research showing psychedelic-assisted therapies can be tremendously effective at helping treat anxiety, severe depression, post-traumatic stress disorder, substance abuse, and mental illness. California should make these services legally available to people.

California’s current proposal, Senate Bill 1012, rightly creates a regulated framework so psychedelic guides can gain certification through state-approved training programs and then legally administer therapy using best practices from established research and clinical trials.

Unfortunately, some of the state’s regulations would be cumbersome enough that even if psychedelics are legalized, many Californians suffering from these conditions may find it necessary to seek less costly treatments on the illicit market.

If passed in its current form, the psychedelics bill would imitate many of the mistakes California lawmakers made when regulating the legalization of marijuana. The state’s high cannabis taxes and burdensome regulations helped make legal marijuana products very expensive. As a result, roughly two-thirds of cannabis demand continues to be fulfilled by illegal suppliers more than six years after the state legalized it.

Rather than passing legalization legislation that overregulates psychedelics in ways that do more harm than good for patients and doctors, California could adopt best practices learned from activists and experts involved in Oregon and Colorado’s experiences.

As it stands, Senate Bill 1012 would likely create problems similar to those Oregon experienced following the creation of its regulated psychedelics market. In 2020, Oregon voters only approved legalized in-person, guided psilocybin services with professionals trained at state-certified schools. Sadly, the high costs of this approach have placed psychedelic therapy beyond the reach of many Oregonians who could benefit from it.

While illicit psilocybin-infused chocolate bars sell for just $60, a single legal psilocybin session can cost $3,000 in Oregon. Since many clinical trial protocols call for multiple administrations as part of a psychedelic treatment, a patient might need to pay more than $10,000 for four treatments in Oregon.

To reduce costs related to its legal licensing process, Colorado is exploring an apprentice-like system for students of psychedelic training schools so they can learn by legally working under the supervision of a more experienced facilitator. Proponents in Colorado have found that peer-based licensing, which is primarily experience-based and does not require other degrees, can help lower consumer costs without reducing safety.

In-person services are more costly and restrictive, especially for those who use psychedelics for chronic pain issues like migraines. Telehealth, where supervised patients self-administer medicines in between virtual appointments with a mental health professional, can reduce the costs of services. A bill recently introduced in New Hampshire proposed a telehealth-friendly system wherein psychedelics such as psilocybin could be sold through the state’s medical cannabis framework. A similar system would improve upon California’s SB 1012.

State Sen. Scott Weiner, D-San Francisco, has championed multiple psychedelics bills over the years, including the one Gov. Gavin Newsom vetoed last year. However, his fellow California legislators have continually bogged down Sen. Weiner’s proposals with unnecessary restrictions and onerous, costly requirements that patients and consumers would ultimately pay.

As California’s legal cannabis market shows, the policy details of legalization matter. When the legal market is too expensive and complex, the illicit market thrives.

California policymakers are right to continue to push for psychedelic legalization. Still, they also need to design therapy regulations that ensure legal psychedelic treatments are affordable and accessible for the Californians who need them most.

A version of this commentary first appeared in The Orange County Register.

Gregory Ferenstein is a senior fellow in drug policy at Reason Foundation.

Geoffrey Lawrence is research director at Reason Foundation.